Blog: Web analytics mid-mortem (#7932)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/web-analytics-mid-mortem.md

---
date: 2024-02-28

> title: "Mid-mortem: How is the web analytics beta going so far?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "How to reinvent the wheel: What we've learned from building web analytics"
```

> title: "Mid-mortem: How is the web analytics beta going so far?"

Author: I prefer the second, but don't love either atm. We've not really articulated these into specific lessons atm.

> title: "Mid-mortem: How is the web analytics beta going so far?"

Reviewer 2: I don't like the second. Given this is mainly for our users, it could just as easily be "An update on our website analytics beta".

Overall, I think this falls between being about why we're doing it, what we've learned, and updating users, but doesn't totally satisfy any of them. If it's an update, what's happening next + how far are we from launching? If it's what we've learned, why should the reader care?

rootPage: /blog
category: Inside PostHog
author: ["joe-martin"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/web-analytics-mid-mortem.jpg
featuredImageType: full
---

[Our web analytics beta](http://app.posthog.com/home#panel=feature-previews) started simple — a dashboard of some stats, plus the top site paths. We wanted to grow it into...

1. A Google Analytics alternative..
1. Which was low cost...
1. Simple to use...
1. Could be built quickly...
1. And was suitable for technical founders...

> We didn’t put a lot of resources behind the idea. The ‘web analytics team’ is, in reality, just [Robbie](/handbook/small-teams/web-analytics). We think in situations like this where we can leverage existing work, one person learns faster than many — though it’s always worth looking at the progress you’re making. 

Reviewer: I don't come away from this intro with a reason why, as a reader, I would want to read this piece. 

Maybe instead of introing what web analytics is, we can talk about lessons right away. An idea:

> Web analytics is a concept that has been around basically forever (in internet time). What more is there to learn when building it ourself? Turns out, a lot.
> Below the surface, building a web analytics product that users want requires solving complicated performance, pricing, and design decisions. To help give you insight into what we are thinking about (and maybe help you make similar decisions), we've listed them here.

Potentially helpful: https://posthog.com/product-engineers/measuring-feature-success

Author: I like this, thanks. Agree it's not a compelling opening. I'd want to keep the goal structure as I think that helps frame the conversation. How about...

> Web analytics as a concept has been around basically forever. What more is there to learn about how to build it? Turns out, a lot!
> 
> Build a product people want always means solving complicated performance, design, and pricing decisions in order to reach your goal. Our goal for web analytics was to build a Google Analytics alternative which was low cost, simple to use, could be built quickly, and was suitable for technical founders.
> 
> To give you insight into how we make decisions, let's explore the challenges under each part of that goal...

### Building a Google Analytics alternative

![GA4 alternative - PostHog](../images/blog/web-analytics/web-analytics-1.png)
<Caption>Google Analytics 4 hasn't been very popular with users</Caption>

Google was already migrating users to the less-than-popular Google Analytics 4 (GA4) when we started this project last year. Predictably, there was a scramble among competitors to grab fleeing users and we thought about launching early to do the same. Instead, we waited until November. 

While we arguably missed out on an early opportunity to establish PostHog as a GA alternative, we knew it was more important to take our time and build a credible MVP. Only then could we  [validate it with actual users](/founders/product-market-fit-game#level-3---validate-your-mvp-by-recruiting-real-users). 

> It’s a good thing we did too. We anticipated new feature requests during the beta, but were surprised to learn that _performance_ mattered far more than we expected. Users view traffic data as simple and therefore want to get it very quickly. Rushing a full launch without doing the work to make web analytics performant would have been a disaster!

Author: Totally agree, there's work here we can explore more -- but some of it is over my head. @robbie-c may be able to add some notes which we can build on here?

### Making it low cost

![Web Analytics - PostHog](../images/blog/web-analytics/web-analytics-1.png)
<Caption>Web analytics shares high-level data, without user identification</Caption>

We haven’t yet made final decisions about how to price web analytics, in part because it has proven to be far more complex than we initially thought.

The challenge is that not all data is created equally. Web analytics and product analytics are separate products which address very different needs — for web analytics you only need high-level figures and don’t need to identify every user. It’s the opposite for product analytics. But they both work by looking at the same event data.

So, how do we build a pricing model that works for both and doesn’t force users to either pay for the same data twice, or capture too little/too much data for a single use-case? 

> This is something we’ve found difficult to investigate during a free beta process, and we’re not sure what the solution will look like. [We’d love to hear your thoughts](http://app.posthog.com/home#supportModal)!

Author: Yeah, we're deliberately hedging here as we haven't yet made final decisions about pricing. I don't want to promise something we can't deliver on.
